Pinterest Inc.’s PINS -4.97%▼ longtime chief executive is stepping down and a Google commerce executive is taking over the top job, the social-media company said Tuesday.

Ben Silbermann, who co-founded Pinterest in 2010 and served as its CEO ever since, is transitioning to executive chairman of the board, a newly created position. His replacement, Bill Ready, comes from Alphabet Inc.’s GOOG -3.47%▼ Google, where he had been president of commerce since 2020. Mr. Ready, who earlier in his career was operating chief of PayPal Holdings Inc. PYPL -5.43%▼ and before that CEO of Venmo, has also joined Pinterest’s board as a director, the company said.

“The decision is driven by what I think is best for Pinterest,” Mr. Silbermann, 39 years old, said of the executive changes in an interview with The Wall Street Journal, adding that he’s looking forward to having more time to focus on consumers’ unmet needs and emerging products. “Bill’s actually going to be a better CEO than I am for this next chapter.”

Pinterest shares rose more than 5% in early after-hours trading following the news.

The passing of the baton at Pinterest follows a wave of tech company founders doing the same in recent years, including Amazon.com Inc.’s Jeff Bezos, Twitter Inc.’s Jack Dorsey and JD.com Inc.’s Richard Liu. It also comes at a time when tech stocks are in the midst of their biggest rout in more than a decade.

Mr. Ready, 42, joins Pinterest as the company is seeking to boost revenue beyond its initial advertising-centric model to include e-commerce initiatives. The company partnered with Shopify Inc. in 2020, giving its users the ability to purchase products they find on its image-sharing platform by clicking on a link to a merchant’s website. Last month, Pinterest acquired the startup the Yes, an artificial-intelligence platform that customizes the fashion-shopping experience for users.

Pinterest faces challenges in this area, though, as online consumer spending has lately been on the decline. Census Bureau data show foot traffic to bricks-and-mortar stores has rebounded since vaccines and booster shots became widely available and the worst waves of the virus receded. Sales slowed at many digital storefronts specializing in apparel, home furnishings and other categories where many consumers prefer to see in-person and touch what they are buying.

Pinterest, he added, is poised to make a significant dent in the e-commerce landscape because its users already come to its platform to get inspiration and take action on a range of projects, such as planning weddings, completing home renovations and creating recipes. “People are on the platform for that purpose,” said Mr. Ready. “The user is coming with a high amount of intent and I think that is quite unique in the ecosystem.”

Last year, PayPal was in talks to buy Pinterest but quickly backed out after the payments company’s shareholders balked. PayPal owns Venmo, another payments service.

In exiting the CEO post, Mr. Silbermann is capping a 12-year run that started at a time when social media was still in its infancy. A native of Iowa, he built Pinterest with two friends after moving to Silicon Valley and working for a few years at Google.

Pinterest initially struggled to raise capital in the depths of the financial crisis, but it went on to land investors such as FirstMark, which funded a large portion of a nearly $1 million seed round. The company’s shares popped when it went public in 2019, but then tumbled after it posted a loss in its first quarterly report.

Later, Pinterest’s business improved as the pandemic took hold, with revenue doubling from 2020 to 2021 and global monthly active users peaking at 478 million in the first quarter of 2021.

Though user engagement has since declined, the company in February reported its first full-year profit and more than $2 billion in annual revenue. For the latest quarter ended in March, Pinterest said revenue grew 18% from a year earlier to $575 million, while global active monthly users fell 9% to 433 million and it posted a net loss of $5 million.

Toward the end of his tenure, Mr. Silbermann faced criticism over his leadership from staff members who accused the company of discrimination toward women and people of color. In late 2020, Pinterest agreed to pay $22.5 million to settle claims of gender discrimination and retaliation by its former Chief Operating Officer Francoise Brougher. She sued Pinterest earlier that year, alleging the social-media company maintained a culture of secrecy among top male executives that resulted in her being left out of meetings and decision-making.

Also in 2020, two former female employees who are Black said they were paid less than their male counterparts and were retaliated against for speaking up about it. Soon after, Pinterest said it hired a law firm to conduct an independent review of its workplace culture. It also hired a global head of inclusion and diversity and added two Black women to its board. And it set new targets for increasing the number of women in leadership and improving racial and ethnic diversity throughout its workforce.

Mr. Silbermann last year told the Journal that he is accountable for the experiences that employees have at work and that it was tough to learn how some staffers said they faced discrimination.